[Music] Good day, I'm Norman Wildberger.
In this video, we want to talk about this
fundamental symmetry that we've introduced into
mathematics. So the usual world of mathematical
objects is now augmented by a kind of alternate
mirrored world of anti-objects. And formally,
this is done very simply by just putting bars
over objects to denote the anti of an object.
This is going to be crucial for us in allowing
us to use the multiset framework to introduce
negative multiplicities in a real sense, in a
concrete sense, rather than just formally and
just sort of waving our hands. So we actually
have objects that represent minus three cows,
or more typically, minus three pixels or
minus three singletons or minus three of
some particular mathematical object. It's going
to be very important for us when we want to
do abstract algebra and look at spaces, linear
spaces, groups, rings, fields in our next video.
Okay, so the basic idea is: here are
our familiar kinds of objects that
we might want to use in mathematics, and
here are the corresponding anti-objects,
which are just created by taking these objects
and putting bars over them. We're just following
the physicists' usage here. So here's a number
three; here's anti-three or three-bar, and we
just take the actual object and put a bar over the
whole thing. And if we want to save space, or it's
a little bit hard for us to put the bar over it,
we'll put the bar on the right-hand upper corner.
Here's our minus four number; here's the anti of
that minus four-bar; just take the object itself,
which is actually a bunch of anti-marks, and put
a bar over it. Here's a vexel, which is an M-set
of singletons; here's the anti V-bar. Here's an
ordered set S; it's got some different elements,
it's ordered because we see some commas.
Here is the corresponding anti-object;
we just take the whole thing and put a bar
over it. We don't modify it in any way;
we just put a bar over the whole thing. Here's
a maxel consisting of a bunch of pixels;
here's the anti of that maxel, M-bar; just
take the whole thing and put a bar over it.
So we have this fundamental symmetry,
which is really officially introduced
by this little equation that anti-mark times
some object, heart, whatever that might be,
as long as it's an actual specific object
that we've already nailed down, then this
product is going to be what we call heart-bar
or the anti-heart. And the crucial defining
property of this anti-object is that if it and
the original object reside in an M-set together,
then they cancel. That means they both disappear
and they're replaced with nothing. So this is
not really a multiplication of heart times
heart-bar; this is just to denote that if
we have a heart and an anti-heart together in
the same M-set, then they are going to cancel.
And notice that it's crucial for us that we do
have a notion of nothing as being represented
by a blank part of our page here to express
what happens when we combine these two things.
So in today's video, we want to talk a little
bit more about this symmetry, get a little
bit more experience with it, and then move to
seeing how it actually helps us in setting up
a wider theory of vexels and maxels. Now, to get
a full symmetry between objects and anti-objects,
we're going to want the anti of an anti-object
to be the original object. So we're going to
introduce that as a definition. We're going
to say that when we take the anti of an anti,
we get the original. In other words,
if we take anti-mark times heart-bar,
which is the anti of the anti-heart—there's the
heart, there's the anti of it, and there's the
anti of the anti—we want that to be the same as
the original object, heart. So we're going to
introduce this as a definition, and this is
really consistent with our understanding that
anti-mark times anti-mark is mark, because
this thing here is anti-mark times heart-bar,
and this heart-bar is anti-mark times heart. And
what we're doing is we're saying let's agree that
this thing is the same as this, and we're allowed
to use associativity at this level to rewrite
this as anti-mark times anti-mark times heart, in
which case we would get mark times heart, which we
know is heart. So the equality of this and this is
really equivalent to this associativity that we're
allowing ourselves at the level of multiplication
of anti-marks with anti-marks with objects.
Okay, and now we can introduce the idea of
the negative or negation of an M-set. This
is a very powerful thing to be able to do. Okay,
so we are now allowed to talk about an M-set and
its negative. How do we do that? Well, here's the
definition in a kind of abstract example. So if
here is an M-set, say heart, heart, diamond, and
these are some kind of mathematical objects that
we have agreed that we've already clearly
defined, then the negative of this M-set,
which is what we get when we multiply by minus
one—here is the number minus one—then the way
we multiply M-sets is what we should do is we
should take the entries of this M-set and the
entries of this M-set and take all possible
products. So anti-mark times heart—well,
that's heart-bar; anti-mark times this
heart—that's heart-bar; anti-mark times
this diamond—that's diamond-bar. So the effect of
multiplying by minus one is to take the anti of
each of the original elements of the M-set,
go from M-set M to the M-set of its anti,
and that is the negative of the original
M-set. So negating an M-set means taking
the anti of all its entries. So we don't have to
do this now in a formal sense. Really, we have
a rather specific idea and framework for talking
about combinations of M-sets, including negative
combinations. All right, so we can do things like
now not just add the M-set A plus the M-set B;
we can also take the M-set A minus the M-set
B, and we have a meaning to what that means.
So here are some exercises for you to ponder
to practice your understanding of how these
anti-objects interact with ordinary objects. So,
try to simplify these expressions if you can;
it might not be possible. So some of these
expressions might not actually make sense,
so you have to try to decide which ones do.
So here, for example, is a what's actually
a singleton because it has a singleton one
in it, and here is another kind of object,
which has a singleton one-bar in it, and we want
to add those. Does that make sense, and if so,
what do we get? Here we have number two singleton
two, and here we have the anti of the singleton
two, which is subtly different from this
situation here. What happens there? Here
is the anti of M-set with inside a three-bar.
Here we have this M-set plus this M-set. Here
we have the negation of this M-set, where this
one here contains a singleton four and the anti
of the singleton five. Here we're adding the
anti of the singleton six and the anti of the
singleton seven. Here we have an M-set consisting
of numbers zero, zero, one, and here's an M-set
consisting of integers one, minus two, and also
the anti. And here's a difference of two M-sets.
So maybe we can also introduce some notational
convention. If we have to write this anti kind
of object in a typing kind of situation,
perhaps we could introduce the idea that,
say, the pixel thirteen anti or thirteen
bar, we could write it perhaps like this:
anti of pixel thirteen. That's pretty unambiguous.
Or maybe we could write pixel thirteen and then
put a bar behind it, meaning this object
barred. Okay, so we could use bar or anti,
possibly, to convey this in a typed situation.
So here are some little things to think about.
So one of the main things that we want to do with
these anti-objects is allow us to be a little bit
more flexible about the use of M-sets. We want
to enlarge our notion of M-set now to include,
as we've seen, not just objects but also
anti-objects. And so we want to introduce a bit
of terminology that captures that idea. So let's
talk about an integral M-set or an M-set. Okay,
so this is some kind of variant or slight
generalization of an M-set. And what is
an integral M-set? Well, suppose that
we have a notion of M-set of some type,
so we've decided on M-sets whose elements are of
a certain type, and we have a very clear idea of
what we're talking about in that context. Then
we'll consider IM-sets of that type to be, well,
a more general kind of multiset that allows
not just the objects of the type that we're
considering but also their antis, all right?
So that objects of the type we're considering,
as well as anti-objects of that type. So when
we allow both objects and anti-objects of a
given type, we'll talk about that as being an
integral M-set, or short, an IM-set of that type.
So here's a very important illustration of
that; it's going to play a big role for us:
the idea of an integral vexel. So we've already
talked about vexels in the context of M-sets of
singletons from, say, Nat, where, for example,
here is a vexel which has some singletons, and
the singletons are from natural numbers. There's a
singleton zero, the singleton one, singleton one,
singleton three—that's a vexel. And we've seen
that we can represent that vexel geometrically
or visually with this freeze-like object, where
we record the number of zero singletons in the
special little box at the beginning—there's one of
them—and then record the number of one singletons,
the number of two singletons (there aren't
any), the number of three singletons, and this
is an open-ended kind of thing; the box doesn't
really end—it's possible for there to be further
additions. And then we saw that we could extend
that idea once we have integers as well as natural
numbers; we can think about using the integers to
specify an extended labeling structure. All right,
so we had vexel from integers; these are
M-sets of singletons from int. That means
something like this, where we have singletons
whose entries are not just natural numbers but
also possibly negative numbers, so over the full
range of integers. And representing something
like this involves a similar kind of thing, but
now we're allowed to introduce multiplicities
of the negatively labeled singletons. So here we
have a singleton minus two—there's one of them,
so we put a one in the minus two spot. There's two
minus one singletons, so we put a two in the minus
one spot. There's Z—Z singleton, so the special
box has a zero. There's zero one singleton,
and there's a single two singleton. So
we've used integers here crucially in
extending our vexel or vector point of view
from a one-sided story to a two-sided story;
that was important. And now we're going another
step up. Okay, so now we want to consider integer
vexels or integral vexels, and let's do that
in two stages. So first of all, from Nat,
where we consider IM-sets of singletons from
Nat, means we're back in this situation here,
but now we're allowed to use not just singletons
but also anti-singletons. Okay, so here we have
a singleton zero, a singleton zero, and here's
an anti-singleton one and a singleton two. The
two singleton zeros are represented by this two
in the zero-labeled box. The anti-singleton one
is represented by this minus one, right? So this
minus one now is telling us that instead of having
one singleton one, we have minus one singleton
ones, which is the same for us as having a single
anti-singleton one. So an anti-singleton one is
playing the role of minus one singleton ones,
and that singleton two is represented by that one
there. So the novelty now is that we're allowed to
put integers here, including negative numbers, and
the negative numbers that appear here are just a
reflection of the existence of anti-singletons
in the actual vexel that we're considering.
And here's the more general thing, an integral
vexel from integers. Here we have a vexel which
contains singletons both with natural number
entries and also with negative number entries,
but we also have anti-singletons. So in this case,
what do we have? We have minus one singleton with
an anti and minus one singleton with the anti, so
there's minus two things altogether in the minus
one box. There's a zero box, there's the minus
one box, there's minus two minus one singletons,
there's a zero zero singleton, there's a single
one singleton, and in terms of singleton twos,
there's minus one of them because there's a bar
over here. So here we're using integers in two
distinctly different ways: we're using integers,
first of all, to allow ourselves to index an
entire two-sided array of positions—position
zero, position one, position two, as well as
position minus one, position minus two, position
minus three, and so on. But we're also using
integers to represent negative multiplicities,
like negative cows. Negative three cows—what does
negative three cows mean? Well, we now know, in
the mathematical context at least, what it means;
it's like there's three anti-cows in our M-set. Of
course, we're not dealing with cows; we're dealing
with lists and sets and multisets and ordered
sets, these data type structures. And for us,
the anti-object is just what you get by
formally putting a bar over the object.
So to summarize, we've now identified a new
framework for vectors, integral vectors from
integers. So these are IM-sets of singletons
from int. This is going to be our preferred
overarching domain for doing vector arithmetic—in
other words, for doing linear algebra, in fact,
for doing geometry. It's a very nice framework,
but now we know exactly what we're talking about.
At some point, we may actually go a little
bit further and up this a little bit to not
just having integer entries in our vexels—in
other words, when we write down a vector,
not just having integer entries, but also having
rational number entries, so once we get to the
stage of having an official version of rational
numbers. But currently, this is a very powerful
framework. So typically, what we're talking
about is something that looks like this when
we represent it geometrically: there's a freeze,
it's two-sided, going to the left and right;
there's the special zero position, and the
actual entries now are integers representing
multiplicities of singletons, where the plus signs
would correspond to having honest singletons,
and the negative signs would correspond to
having anti-singletons. And necessarily,
these things are finite, because we are, I remind
you, always obliged to write things down fully.
When we're talking about things precisely and
completely, we have to illustrate our concepts
by writing things down completely and precisely,
so no going off to infinity at this stage. Okay,
so an actual object of this has to be written down
entry by entry by entry, all of it there. And it's
really a short form for a corresponding M-set
or IM-set. So these are two-sided, open-ended
vectors with integral entries, and they correspond
to IM-sets of singletons from int. We're going to
say this is a lovely framework for thinking about
geometry and linear algebra in a very big way.
And another main example for us is integral
maxels. So we started off talking about maxels
as M-sets of pixels from natural numbers, and then
we enlarged that to consider maxels as M-sets of
pixels from integers. For example, here's a maxel
with these three pixels: zero, minus one; zero,
minus one; one, two. And that corresponds to this
geometric grid kind of view, where this is the
zero zero position. It's the one zero, two zero,
three zero over here; zero zero, zero one, zero
two, zero three; but now also zero minus one, zero
minus two. So this two here is representing the
fact that we have two zero minus one pixels, and
there's a single one two pixel. Okay, now we want
to extend this by going to integral maxels. First
of all, integral maxels—these would be IM-sets of
pixels from natural numbers, just the same kind
of sort of limited freeze that just works with
a quadrant. But more interestingly, integral
maxels from int. So these are M-sets of pixels
from integers. So these are just like these ones,
except now we're also allowed the possibility of
having anti-pixels as well as pixels. So here's
N, which looks quite a bit like this one,
except that instead of having these two pixels,
it has their corresponding anti-pixels. So instead
of having a two in this position, in this zero
minus one position, we have a minus two, because
there's these two anti-pixels, and we still have
a single honest pixel one two represented by that
one there. So now we're in a position to deal with
matrices with integer values, and matrices which
are very general—that they have entries covering
the entire plane. It's a very general, beautiful
framework for doing matrix theory and linear
algebra and other things as well, as we'll see.
Okay, so we are now in a great position
because these integral points of view,
these integral M-sets that we now have at
our disposal, allow us entry to a lot of
abstract algebra. So we're able to now, in a
more precise fashion than we currently have,
start talking about abstract algebra notions,
such as groups, rings, fields, vector spaces,
modules, and other things, in a more precise,
careful, concrete manner. In the next video,
I want to start that by giving
an overview of abstract algebra,
a bird's-eye picture of abstract algebra. It's
a relatively modern mathematical development,
roughly 100 years old, and which is now
very, very extensive. But I want to give
you an introduction to this, and then we'll be
in a good position to start using this concrete,
precise way of thinking about data structures to
revitalize many of those topics. Very exciting. So
I hope you'll join me for that. I'm Norman
Wildberger. Thanks for [Music] listening